Of the three elements traditionally taken to make up a story—setting, characterization, and plot—Tolkien has been universally acknowledged to excel in the ﬁrst; that is, world-building: Middle-earth is made vividly real to the reader. For the second point, earlier critics sometimes un- derestimated his powers of characterization—Ursula K. LeGuin once made the astonishing confession that she could not tell Merry and Pip- pin apart3—but one of the good effects of the Jackson ﬁlms has been that, by raising a debate on whether Jackson got certain characters right, they have focused attention on the unappreciated subtlety of Tolkien’s.own characterization. Finally, on the third point, Tolkien has been much praised, by all but the most churlish, as a storyteller, for being adroit at presenting a gripping plot. Indeed, Richard West long ago wrote a semi- nal essay on Tolkien’s gift with polyphonic narrative, his ability to move back and forth between the various strands of the plot without ever los- ing track of the main thrust of the story. Diana Wynne Jones, herself a successful fantasy author, wrote from the point of view of a fellow author when she praised Tolkien’s skill in managing a long, complex plot while keeping his readers enthralled and concluded, “there really was nothing about narrative that Tolkien didn’t know.”4
Where Tolkien has been mercilessly criticized has been on quite dif- ferent grounds. First, for his subject matter (indeed, that anyone should write fantasy at all in this day and age). Second, for what is taken to be his afﬁrmation of traditional values (which by the way is far more subtle and double-edged than either his admirers or his critics sometimes real- ize, a point nicely made in Marjorie Burns’s Perilous Realms). And third, for his style. Since the ﬁrst topic, his subject matter, has been masterfully addressed by Tolkien himself in his essays “Beowulf: The Monsters and The Critics” and “On Fairy-stories,” and since the second, attacks on his values system, tend to be politically motivated and self-defeating, re- ﬂecting worse on those who make them (e.g., China Miéville, Germaine Greer) than on their intended target, I would like to focus in on the third topic: Tolkien’s style.
Tolkien’s style is the tool with which he crafts his story. So it seems distinctly odd that, among all the attention that have been focused on that story, there has been very little critique of his style, aside from Tolk- ien’s own spirited defense5 of his occasional use of archaisms in certain contexts and Brian Rosebury’s careful demonstration of the obvious but often-overlooked point that while Tolkien is frequently accused of writ- ing “Biblical” prose, dense and inverted and artiﬁcial and archaic, in fact the vast majority of The Lord of the Rings is written in ordinary everyday English. It is no surprise that a disgruntled Edmund Wilson ﬂatly assert- ed that both Tolkien’s prose and poetry are bad (328), but what are we to make of Stephen Medcalf ’s outrageous claim that Tolkien “really was ill-at-ease with his own language”?6 Or Burton Raffel, who although he uses words like “magniﬁcent,” “entrancing,” “extraordinary,” “superb,” “wonderful,” and “a genuine epic” to describe The Lord of the Rings none- theless asserts that it is not “literature” because it is too readable? That is, so far as I understand him, that its prose is meant to deliver the story rather than be savored like a rare cheese or, in his words, “there is no real attempt to explore sensory realities; only narrative realities matter to Tolkien, and so adept is he that nothing more matters to us” (222). Raffel argues that Tolkien excels in delivering an engrossing story that sweeps
